I actually want to start out with just thanking you so much all for being here.
I really appreciate your time.
I know that little show there did not show it, but I really do.
I really appreciate this opportunity to talk to you.
So my name is Andrew Holtz, and the name of my presentation is Oops, I'm a Manager, and
I'd like to start off by talking a little about who I am to set that context.
So who I am now is I'm at posit, I am an Engineering Manager there on the Open Source group, and
I get to spend my time supporting the Shiny team, and the Cordo team, ML Ops team, ML
Verse team, working with amazing people.
But if we roll back the clock a little, say about 25 years ago, I was a System Engineer
at Bell Labs, and I was coding some C++, doing some mapping stuff, having a good time,
writing lots of requirements documents, those were big then, working on a big operational
support system, and then a different group within my department kind of spun out and
took over some products, and they recruited me to join them.
So there I am, you know, young, starting off my career with like a dozen or so experienced
Bell Labs, grizzled veterans, we got 10 years, 15 years, 25 years in the trenches, we're
now starting this new venture, and they're looking for someone to help organize, looking
to help someone set goals, deal with the little customer stuff.
Pretty much everyone else in that line took a big step back.
And I was kind of standing forward, and I said, oh, well, I have my Computer Science
and Psychology double major, yeah, let's go, let's give it a shot.
So I sort of started like really early on into this management role.
So that's...
So this today is me having had this great experience getting into it early in this technical
managerial path, and I've had so many opportunities through it, and I kind of want to share it,
and I want to share it through one particular exercise around one-on-ones that I think is
a great way to test out if maybe this is a path for you, and that's the goal here today.
So why one-on-ones?
Why do I want to talk about one-on-ones so much?
Well, one-on-ones, in my experience, create trust, like you're talking to that other person,
it's individual, you're talking about what matters, it's in a very specific context,
that builds up trust over time, and that's the connective tissue that make really great
teams work.
If there's a lot of trust among the team, you're going to have a team that's really
executing at a high level, and I'll tell you, being part of a team that's executing
at a high level is like the best kind of way to work and a lot, a lot of fun.
So why one-on-ones though specifically?
There's a lot of leadership things you could talk about to help the team.
Well, the fact of the matter is, one-on-ones, if you're doing them right, are scheduled
regularly.
They're two people, so there's room for both of them, and in fact, a need for both of them
to actively participate, and that because it's repeated, and because it's a shared responsibility,
both people need to do their part of it, no matter what role you're in, in an organization,
one-on-ones give you the opportunity to practice your leadership skills.
So it's really good to focus in on, it's regular, so it happens, and you can say, hey, how did
that one go, learn over time, and you can exercise leadership muscles, again, from pretty
much any position in a company or in an organization.
And then lastly, again, one-on-ones are just really important.
Some conversations aren't going to happen anywhere else that are so important about
career growth and opportunities and things like that.
You got to have one-on-ones to have those, and then there's also some other topics that
maybe aren't so obvious that are important, so I'd like to talk just a little bit more
about that.
So I'm not a neurologist, know very little about the brain, but I did take my psych classes,
and so to set this up, maybe you've been in a meeting where someone was talking about
something and someone else kind of overreacted, maybe didn't just overreact a little but seemed
to kind of freak out over something relatively innocuous, well, we have some brain chemistry
going on there.
The prefrontal cortex is the part of your brain that's responsible for logic and rationality
and deep work and all this great stuff.
We also have amygdalas that were really important to human surviving and all these things along
those years.
Well, what does the amygdala do?
It's scanning the environment.
It's scanning the environment, looking for danger, and if danger comes up, it tells your
prefrontal cortex, hey, quiet down, we don't have any time for your crap, we need to fight
or flight.
Well, the fact of the matter is group meetings are complex environments, and so you have
this risk of actually having that amygdala trigger over something maybe that didn't seem
like it deserved it, but it triggers it, shuts down rationality, you get that overreaction,
and it can really cause a lot of damage that you can stay with a team for a long time.
So we have these really important topics, not just about career growth, but about other
things that are best covered in a one-on-one.
So hopefully I've made the case that one-on-ones are pretty important.
Again, we got better one-on-ones, we're building trust between team members, that results in
stronger teams over time.
What I'd like to do is run through three different flavors.
There's some overlap here.
You may have a different role in different ones.
It's okay, there's a little bit of a lesson, hopefully, from any of them.
We're going to talk about a goal for each one, and then we're going to talk about a
specific tactic.
Because in my experience, if you have a habit, if you can build it in, you can get better
at something and improve.
And if you don't have a simple thing to do to repeat, it's hard to kind of keep it front
of mind and keep getting better at it.
So first type, most common type, probably the most important one, probably applies to
pretty much everyone here.
We have a team lead and a team member.
We're trying to build trust.
We know that that's one of the goals I've already made the case for, that that's just
so important to a team operating.
And then we have the idea of establishing goals.
And by establishing goals, I mean, what's the group goals?
You want to make sure we're on the same page and understanding of that.
We also have individual goals.
And really what we want is alignment between them.
So a really good career conversation, again, one of those foundational one-on-one ideas,
is getting aligned of, hey, I'm really interested in learning this thing, and hey, the team
has a gap in that.
Let's put them together.
That's a great career conversation.
That's going to set both the team and the individual up to be successful within it.
Giving feedback.
Obviously, one-on-ones are a really important place to do that.
And I mean both ways.
Giving feedback isn't just team lead to team manager.
It is both team lead to the team member and back, vice versa.
So one of the things that I learned over time, or I got taught, let's say, about management
and doing one-on-ones is, well, if you have to give someone feedback, you feed them a
crap sandwich.
So we have a piece of bread.
I guess that's the good part.
And then we have the harsh criticism maybe in the middle.
So I guess that's the crap.
And then another piece of bread on the other end to make a sandwich of it.
My experience, that's fine.
You definitely want a mix of good and bad things.
You want to predominate with good as much as you can.
Focus on positives where you can, not avoiding the important feedback when it comes up.
But in my experience, it's much better to start with a, here's a specific observation.
This is something that happened in as factual terms as I can.
And then ask questions about it.
Don't assume you know that everything's going on.
That is a form of feedback.
Hey, here's this behavior.
Maybe it had some consequences.
Maybe it wasn't ideal.
But let's talk about it.
I want to understand it better.
I want to see where you're coming from and make sure I get it.
That's the two version of feedback.
And then you can turn up the volume as you get comfortable, as you understand the person
and how they react.
Because some people, you can say all the great things in the world and have one little negative
one.
They're going to obsess about the negative one.
And your next five one-on-ones will be affected by that.
Other people, they'll only hear the positives.
You said something you felt was pretty direct and somehow flies right over their head.
They miss it.
So you got to be attentive to what's going on in the conversation and say, OK, how is
this landing?
And turn it up over time.
That's a better way than the crap sandwich.
OK.
A bunch of different questions here.
These are all really good topics, categories, checking in, what are our priorities.
We got our feedback one we already talked about.
We got our career conversations.
I'm just going to call out one that I really personally have gotten a lot of value on,
which is the in the middle for the check-in, any sneaky issues worrying you.
So what do I mean by a sneaky issue?
That's something that's small, maybe in the back of someone's mind.
It's kind of picking at them and picking at them.
It's not a big deal.
You don't need to bring it up yet, but it's simmering, it's simmering, and then it boils
over.
And once it boils over, it's actually a big problem.
If you can ask questions that get you to those earlier simmering levels, it's much easier
to address challenges.
So that's just one of my personal favorites from this big list here.
So I told you tactics.
These tactics are going to be dead simple.
They're going to be so obvious.
Some of them you probably already do.
But if you build in the habits around them and give them a try and put the multiples
together, you're going to get more out of one-on-ones, you're going to move your team
forward.
So the first tactic, topic scorecard, all you're going to do is take a list like that
one I have in here.
I have a link to it at the end.
You can use that list.
You can do your own list, but you're going to set your alarm for five minutes before
your next one-on-one with whoever it is, and you're going to pull up that list of topics
and you're just going to spend a little bit of time planning out what's a good topic for
me and that person this week, this month.
Five minutes is all I ask for.
Makes a huge difference in adding the quality.
You're about to spend a half hour or 45 minutes with this person going through stuff.
All you have to do is take five minutes ahead of time to do a little bit of planning.
It goes a really long way.
So one last comment on team leads and team member one-on-ones, a lot of data teams I
find are matrixed.
So what do I mean by that?
You have a data person, they're on a team with maybe a bunch of software developers
or another skill set going on, and then they report, the data person reports up through
a data chain, like a data management team and that kind of thing.
If you have that situation, I just encourage you to spend a little extra time in that supportive
mode and spend time talking about the goals of that team.
If you're embedded and you have a specialty and you have a bunch of other people that
don't have that same specialty, understanding what they're trying to achieve and tailoring
your efforts to theirs is really important.
Last thing is, if you're the manager on that other team, make sure you have the occasional
one-on-one with the team lead that your person is in.
Again, talk about goals and how it's going, help them head off troubles if you can.
So moving on to the next type of one-on-one.
We have you and your boss.
So for you and your boss, you're going to want to spend a little more time here prepping
for it because frankly, what does boss mean?
So we're assuming some level up or even a couple of levels up the hierarchy.
Basically, each level up is going to add complexity.
It's going to add more stuff that they're supposed to know about.
And so you're going to help them by setting a little bit more context and being understanding
about where they're coming from.
I mean, basically, the wider your scope, the more things you don't know.
And that's part of why managers often seem clueless.
And I say that as a manager who has often seemed clueless.
Wider scope, more likely not to know things.
That's just the nature of the beast.
So when you're going into that, you're going to say, okay, I need to understand a little
bit more about where my boss is coming from.
And I'm going to try and tailor to that like, wow, they have a wider scope.
I want to understand where they're coming from, tailor it to that, make it efficient
for them to remember things and help them through that.
Another goal we have is to really avoid meeting surprises.
If they find out about something that's gone wrong on your team or something that wasn't
delivered, but it's with meetings with some of their peers or those kind of things, you
don't want them to find out from someone else.
So one of your goals is always when you're looking at your topics, if you have something
that they might hear about later, try and give them the heads up.
That's going to go a long way to avoiding painful situations in conversations later.
And then my last thought on this goal is just be explicit about what you're asking for from
them.
That'll help them give you the feedback.
If you're saying, hey, this is just to inform you of what I'm doing or what's going on in
the team or this thing about the project, say, informing.
If it's more like, hey, I really want some advice about this, I don't know this or that,
ask for advice, be specific.
The last thing is if you need an action for them, call it out.
Ask, say, hey, I need your action, I need your help on this thing, get this funding,
go to that other person, that kind of thing.
So again, you're meeting with your boss, ask and categorize those different things.
Okay, we're on to tactic two.
Again, super simple.
You're probably doing this, maybe you are, maybe you aren't, I highly recommend it if
you're not.
All we're going to do is have a shared document.
That's going to be the history of our different one-on-ones that we've had.
So you're going to just have a date, you're going to have the topics that you picked out
in the previous five minutes before, maybe a little bit of stuff on there, and then takeaways
and action items.
And then you're going to rotate those down in the shared list.
Again, that's going to be the context that I mentioned is a goal, help your boss.
They can kind of read through those things, they can put stuff in there, all stuff like
that.
So I think not having my notes, I'm running a little behind.
So I apologize for the speed of the end, but I'm going to kind of power on through here.
So the third type, so we have two tactics and two types.
Last one is between you and your peers.
In that one, you're going to really focus on the shared space that you have together.
A lot of organizations, whether it's at the team level or the bigger group level, a lot
gets lost between team members or between groups.
There's essentially gaps that open up, and you're going to use the one-on-one to establish
what that landscape is.
Hey, where do we have dependencies?
Where could things get disconnected?
That kind of thing.
Again, you have these gaps, and you're going to use your one-on-one with peers to fill
those in.
Again, between members of a team or across into other ones.
You can almost think of it as a little mini retrospective, like what's going well, what's
not going well?
Let's explore this.
I guess as a pro tip in this one, offering a little bit of help can go a really long
way, whether maybe that's across groups or that kind of thing, and accepting help if
they have it.
That is going to build up trust, help fill that gap, and not allow things and allow waste
to kind of fall in those gaps in between.
So our third tactic, we're going to just do, and we're going to be intentional about planning
our one-on-ones.
So what do I mean by that?
We're going to just do a little network graph.
We're going to put ourselves in the center.
We're the center of the universe.
That's wonderful.
We're going to put other people that we need from the organization around us to help us,
and for us to help them.
The most important relationships you're going to have, and you're just going to look at
it, and you're going to put the closeness for how important they are.
Then you're going to look at your one-on-one schedule and say, hey, does my one-on-one
schedule reflect who I think the most important relationships to my success and my group's
success are?
My guess is if you do that, there's a couple that are missing.
And the pro tip in this case is don't just have one-on-ones, especially with peers of
the ones you like, and have a good time.
Some one-on-ones are fun.
Often it's the one-on-ones that aren't as fun, or the relationships that need work,
or where the gaps are going to open up.
So don't fall into the trap of, oh, that's the fun one.
I'll keep doing those.
And oh, there's this other one, and ah, it didn't get rescheduled.
I'm going to let that go.
Don't fall into that trap.
So network graph, be intentional.
And frankly, all things have their seasons.
There may be times where, hey, the last couple one-on-ones haven't been that fruitful.
Make it less frequent.
Let it drop off the list.
What we're going for in all of these things is something that has come up a lot for me
at Posit in particular, which is we're trying to get people aligned enough and not have
gaps so that they can make a lot of their own decisions.
They can stay independent, do what they need to do.
But they're doing it pulling in the same direction.
And it's sort of interesting, because Posit, again, I'm working with the open source teams,
amazing teams.
These are some of the most autonomous software engineers I've worked with in my long history
of doing this.
So having goals that are understood, having trust between team members gets that much
more important.
So you're enabling the autonomy.
So it's really important, again, aligned.
We're going in the same direction.
But autonomous, we know enough to make really good decisions and be independent and get
our piece of the work done.
So yeah, in conclusion, I'm just making a plug for technical management.
It's been an awesome career choice for me.
It's been really interesting, different challenges.
And frankly, there's often opportunities, because so many technical people are afraid
of kind of, oh, I don't want to fall into the trap of going into management.
It means there's opportunities there, and not just opportunities for yourself, but opportunities
to serve the team.
OK, down to my last minute, I want to just indulge my silly Dr. Seuss stuff a little
bit more.
And I have a quick poem that's hopefully going to remind you about everything and maybe even
cover some of the things I missed since I haven't had my speaker notes.
In the land of the office where meetings reside, let's talk about one-on-ones.
Oh, they can't be denied.
For they're more than just chatter, more than just talk, they're the path to success, not
a casual walk.
So listen up closely, for tactics are here to make all your one-on-ones something quite
dear.
Tactic one, my friend, is a tip quite divine.
Rotate different topics, let variety shine.
Don't dwell on status, oh no, not too long, for a mix of discussions will make your bond
strong.
Tactic two, you see, is a gem quite rare.
Always prepare notes, show that you care.
Keep a shared running set for both you and for me, so when we look back, our progress
we'll see.
Tactic three, ah yes, is the key to the door.
Draw out relationships, you'll find so much more.
Schedule frequency and length oh so wisely, for those are the moments that matter precisely.
So there you have it, tactics one, two, and three.
Apply them with care, and then you will see, though they may seem simple, don't let that
confound, for their impact on success is truly profound.
As your one-on-ones flourish, like a well-tended tree.
Together, together, how great we will all be.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, Andrew.